Blog post for Server Side Apply to GA (#28964)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2021-07-15-server-side-apply-ga.md

---
layout: blog
title: "Kubernetes 1.22: Server Side Apply moves to GA"
description: >
  Server Side Apply moves to GA.
date: 2021-07-15T10:00:00-08:00
slug: Server-Side-Apply-GA
---

Authors: Jeffrey Ying, Google & Joe Betz, Google

> Server-side Apply (SSA) has been promoted to GA in the Kubernetes v1.22 release. Support for Server-side Apply was introduced as alpha in Kubernetes v1.14 release, promoted to beta in the Kubernetes v1.16 release, and [promoted to beta 2](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2020/04/01/kubernetes-1.18-feature-server-side-apply-beta-2/) in the Kubernetes v1.18 release.
> 
> The GA milestone indicates that Kubernetes users may depend on the feature and its API without fear of backwards incompatible changes in future causing regressions. GA features are protected by the [Kubernetes deprecation policy](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/).

Reviewer: nits:
```suggestion
Server-side Apply (SSA) has been promoted to GA in the Kubernetes v1.22 release. Support for Server-side Apply was introduced as alpha in Kubernetes v1.14 release, promoted to beta in the Kubernetes v1.16 release, and [promoted to beta 2](/blog/2020/04/01/kubernetes-1.18-feature-server-side-apply-beta-2/) in the Kubernetes v1.18 release.

The GA milestone means you can depend on the feature and its API, without fear of future backwards-incompatible changes. GA features are protected by the Kubernetes [deprecation policy](/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/).
```

Reviewer: I'm tempted to skip the history part:
```markdown
Support for Server-side Apply was introduced as alpha in Kubernetes v1.14 release, promoted to beta in the Kubernetes v1.16 release, and [promoted to beta 2](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2020/04/01/kubernetes-1.18-feature-server-side-apply-beta-2/) in the Kubernetes v1.18 release.
``
or move it out of the article introduction. This is a blog article that goes out after the release, so the voice and tone we want for it is similar to a tech lightning talk. It's OK to link to the release notes for more details, too.

Author: removed the history part

What is Server-side Apply?

> Server-side Apply helps users and controllers manage their resources through declarative configurations. Server-side Apply replaces the client side apply feature implemented by “kubectl apply” with a server-side implementation, permitting use by tools/clients other than kubectl. To learn more about why Server-side Apply is important, or to learn how to use Server-side Apply from `kubectl`, see the [Beta 2 release announcement](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2020/04/01/kubernetes-1.18-feature-server-side-apply-beta-2/).

Reviewer: I think this point (“why is server-side apply important”) is worth re-iterating, rather than hyperlinking to it.
If we want to give readers a chance to learn more, let's direct them to https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/server-side-apply/

Author: Updated to include the "why is this important" and adding a link to the SSA documentation.

> What’s new since Beta?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What’s new since Beta?
```

Since the [Beta 2 release](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2020/04/01/kubernetes-1.18-feature-server-side-apply-beta-2/) subresources support has been added, and both client-go and Kubebuilder have added comprehensive support for Server-side Apply. This completes the Server-side Apply functionality required to make controller development practical.

> Subresource Support

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Support for subresources

```

> Server-side Apply now fully supports subresources like status and scale. This is particularly important for controllers, which are often responsible for writing to subresources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Server-side Apply now fully supports subresources like `status` and `scale`. This is particularly important for [controllers](/docs/concepts/architecture/controller/), which are often responsible for writing to subresources.
```

Reviewer: Maybe an example, eg:
```markdown

In the API, if you have a StatefulSet named `example` you can fetch it as 
`/apis/apps/v1/namespaces/default/statefulsets/example`.
Kubernetes subresources allow fine-grained access control, so that you can allow
acccess to write to `/apis/apps/v1/namespaces/default/statefulsets/example/scale` but
not to change any other field. Now, the controller that makes that update can rely on
server-side apply to help manage potential conflicts.
```

> Server-side Apply support in client-go

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Server-side Apply support in client-go
```

The "apply configurations" also have convenience `With<FieldName>` functions that make it easier to build apply requests. This allows developers to set fields without having to deal with the fact that all the fields in the "apply configuration" types are pointers, and are inconvenient to set using go. For example `MinReplicas: &0` is not legal go code, so without the `With` functions, developers would work around this problem by using a library, .e.g. `MinReplicas: pointer.Int32Ptr(0)`, but string enumerations like `corev1.Protocol` are still a problem since they cannot be supported by a general purpose library. In addition to the convenience, the `With` functions also isolate developers from the underlying representation, which makes it safer for the underlying representation to be changed to support additional features in the future.

> How to use Server-side Apply in a controller?

Reviewer: ```suggestion

## Using Server-side Apply in a controller

```

> The new client-go support makes it much easier to use Server-side Apply in controllers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use the new support for Server-side Apply no matter how you implemented your controller.
However, the new client-go support makes it particularly asier to use Server-side Apply in controllers.
```

```go
fieldMgr := "my-field-manager"
deploymentClient := clientset.AppsV1().Deployments("default")

// read, could also be read from a shared informer
deployment, err := deploymentClient.Get(ctx, "example-deployment", metav1.GetOptions{})
if err != nil {
  // handle error
}

// extract
deploymentApplyConfig, err := appsv1ac.ExtractDeployment(deployment, fieldMgr)
if err != nil {
  // handle error
}

// modify-in-place
deploymentApplyConfig.Spec.Template.Spec.WithContainers(corev1ac.Container().
	WithName("modify-slice").
	WithImage("nginx:1.14.2"),
)

// apply
applied, err := deploymentClient.Apply(ctx, extractedDeployment, metav1.ApplyOptions{FieldManager: fieldMgr})
```

For developers using Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs), the Kubebuilder apply support provides the same capabilities. <TODO: explain how to use Kubebuilder in more detail?>.

> How to Use Server-side Apply with CRDs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Server-side Apply and CustomResourceDefinitions
```

> It is strongly recommended that all CRDs have a schema. Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) without a schema are treated as unstructured data by Server-side Apply. Keys are treated as fields in a struct and lists are assumed to be atomic.

Reviewer: I would hyperlink to https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/ in case readers aren't familiar.

CRD that specify a schema are able to specify additional annotations in the schema. Please refer to the documentation on the full list of available annotations.

New annotations since beta:

Defaulting: Values for fields that appliers do not express explicit interest in should be defaulted. This prevents an applier from unintentionally owning a defaulted field that might cause conflicts with other appliers. If unspecified, the default value is nil or the nil equivalent for the corresponding type.

> - Usage: see the [Defaulting Documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/extend-kubernetes/custom-resources/custom-resource-definitions/#defaulting) for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Usage: see the [CRD Defaulting](/docs/tasks/extend-kubernetes/custom-resources/custom-resource-definitions/#defaulting)  documentation for more details.
```

The "apply configurations" also have convenience `With<FieldName>` functions that make it easier to build apply requests. This allows developers to set fields without having to deal with the fact that all the fields in the "apply configuration" types are pointers, and are inconvenient to set using go. For example `MinReplicas: &0` is not legal go code, so without the `With` functions, developers would work around this problem by using a library, .e.g. `MinReplicas: pointer.Int32Ptr(0)`, but string enumerations like `corev1.Protocol` are still a problem since they cannot be supported by a general purpose library. In addition to the convenience, the `With` functions also isolate developers from the underlying representation, which makes it safer for the underlying representation to be changed to support additional features in the future.

## Using Server-side Apply in a controller

The new client-go support makes it much easier to use Server-side Apply in controllers.

> When authoring new controllers to use Server-side Apply, a good approach is to have the controller recreate the apply configuration for an object each time it reconciles that object.  This ensures that the controller fully reconciles all the fields that it is responsible for. Controllers typically should unconditionally set all the fields they own by setting `Force: true` in the `ApplyOptions`. Controllers must also provide a `FieldManager` name that is unique to the reconciliation loop that apply is called from.

Reviewer 2: I'm guessing this replaces deepEquals logic? Wouldn't this add additional load on the api server? But agree that this definitely simplifies the reconciler.

Reviewer 3: Can you elaborate on how this replaces `deepEquals`?

Reviewer 2: @apelisse , sorry about the confusion. I was asking if this ('recreate the apply configuration for an object each time it reconciles') phrase meant SSA is a replacement for performing `deepEquals` before sending create/update request to k8s api server to avoid infinite reconcile loop?

Reviewer 3: Your assumptions are all reasonable and great. This should, in general, replace the `deepEqual` since controller shouldn't even have to download the object in the first place. We've spent a lot of time benchmarking and optimizating the apiserver so that this doesn't become a problem, thank you!

Reviewer 2: Thank you!

- Golang: `+default=<value>`,
- OpenAPI extension: `default: <value>`

Atomic for maps and structs:

Maps: By default maps are granular. A different manager is able to manage each map entry. They can also be configured to be atomic such that a single manager owns the entire map.

- Usage: Refer to [Merge Strategy](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/server-side-apply/#merge-strategy) for a more detailed overview
- Golang: `+mapType=granular/atomic`
- OpenAPI extension: x-kubernetes-map-type: granular/atomic`

Structs: By default structs are granular and a separate applier may own each field. For certain kinds of structs, atomicity may be desired. This is most commonly seen in small coordinate-like structs such as Field/Object/Namespace Selectors, Object References, RGB values, Endpoints (Protocol/Port pairs), etc.

- Usage: Refer to [Merge Strategy](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/server-side-apply/#merge-strategy) for a more detailed overview
- Golang: `+structType=granular/atomic`
- OpenAPI extension: `x-kubernetes-map-type:atomic/granular`

What's Next?

> <TODO: jpbetz: explain WG API expression's future a bit?>

Reviewer 3: We could mention the work we're doing with regard to the openapi schema, how we want to change it and what we want to improve and why?

Author: I added a 1 liner to describe the next steps around the openapi schema 

`After Server Side Apply, the next focus for the API Expression working-group is around improving the expressiveness and size of the published Kubernetes API schema.`

Is this enough or would you recommend going into more depth on each of the projects?

How to get involved?

> The working-group for apply is available on slack #wg-api-expression, through the mailing list and we also meet every other Tuesday at 9.30 PT on Zoom.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The working-group for apply is [wg-api-expression](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/wg-api-expression). It is available on slack [#wg-api-expression](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/C0123CNN8F3), through the [mailing list](https://groups.google.com/g/kubernetes-wg-api-expression) and we also meet every other Tuesday at 9.30 PT on Zoom.
```
